\section{XML-based Project Configurations and Inheritance}
\label{section:xml-inheritance}

As previously discussed, Opus uses XML-based configuration files to
flexibly specify the various aspects of a project as well as to specify the
appearance of the different tabs in the GUI\@.

One configuration (the \emph{child}) can inherit from another configuration
(the \emph{parent}).  By default, the child inherits all the information
contained in the project.  However, it can override any information
inherited from the parent, and add additional information.  This means that
you can use default projects as parents for another project you want to
create that is mostly the same as an existing project, but has some changes
from it.  An XML configuration specifies its parent using the \emph{parent}
entry under the ``General'' section of the XML\@.  The value of this is the
name of the XML file that contains the parent configuration.  When
searching for this file, Opus first looks in the same directory that holds
the child configuration.  If it's not found there, it expects to find a
path in the Opus source code tree, starting with the name of a project like
\package{eugene} or \package{urbansim}.

This works well with the convention that users should create their own
projects in the \file{opus/project_configs} directory.  You can have
several configurations in your \file{opus/project_configs} directory, one
inheriting from the other.  Ultimately, though, one or more of these
configurations should inherit from a default configuration in the source
tree.  For example, Figure \ref{fig:eugene-gridcell-xml-default} shows the
contents of the default project for \file{eugene_gridcell} in
\file{opus/project_configs}.  This has almost no content of its own, but
rather inherits almost everything from the default configuration in the
source tree at \file{eugene/configs/eugene_gridcell.xml}.

\begin{figure}[htp]
\begin{center}
\begin{verbatim}
<opus_project>
  <general>
    <description type="string">Minimal user configuration for the Eugene 
        gridcell project</description>
    <parent type="file">eugene/configs/eugene_gridcell.xml</parent>
  </general>
</opus_project>
\end{verbatim}
\end{center}
\caption{Contents of the default eugene\_gridcell.xml project}
\label{fig:eugene-gridcell-xml-default}
\end{figure}

A small section of the \file{eugene/configs/eugene_gridcell.xml} file is
shown in Figure \ref{fig:opus-xml}.  It is just text, but in a structured
format, with nodes corresponding to information that is displayed in the
GUI.  Some of the content of the XML provide data used by the GUI to
determine how to display information, or what menu items are appropriate to
connect to the node in the GUI.  Notice that this project in turn inherits
from \file{urbansim_gridcell/configs/urbansim_gridcell.xml}.

\begin{figure}[htp]
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[scale=0.4]{graphics/opus-xml.png}
\end{center}
\caption{An Excerpt from eugene/configs/eugene\_gridcell.xml}
\label{fig:opus-xml}
\end{figure}

To change any of the options in the XML tree you need to be able to edit
it.  Inherited parts of the XML tree are shown in blue in the left pane in
the GUI\@.  These can't be edited directly --- they just show inherited
information.  You can make an inherited portion of the XML tree editable by
right clicking on it and selecting `Add to curent project.''  This copies
the inherited information into the local XML tree.  (We saw an example of
doing this in Section \ref{sec:configuring-scenario}.)

A few details about the ``Add to current project'' command: in Section
\ref{sec:configuring-scenario}, when we added \code{lastyear} to the
current project, the containing nodes in the tree (\code{years_to_run} and
\code{Eugene_baseline}) also turned black, since they needed to be added to
the current project as well to hold \code{lastyear}.  It's also possible to
click directly on \code{years_to_run}, or even \code{Eugene_baseline}, and
add the XML tree under that to the current project.  However, we recommend
adding just the part you're editing to the current project, and not others.
(You can always add other parts later.)  The reason is that once a part of
the tree is added to the current project, the inheritance relation of that
part with the parent disappears, and changes to the parent won't be
reflected in the child XML\@.  For example, if you add all of the
\code{Eugene_baseline} node to the current project, save your
configuration, and then update the source code, changes to some obscure
advanced feature in the XML in the parent in the source tree wouldn't show
up in your configuration.
